+++
title = "Fall 2020 Plans"

[taxonomies]
tags = []

[extra]
comment_issue = 9
+++

RIP, 5 month gap.

# Short-Term Plans (Next Semester)

- Silver: Finish highlighting, maybe take a look at LSP? Perf still seems
  problematic, though if the Eclipse plugin's performance is less bad than
  Monto 3's was, seems like there's still low-hanging fruit.

- Algebraic Effects for ableC: The [Koka][koka] group recently had a talk on
  how they compile their language (with algebraic effects) to efficient C. I
  think the same approach should work to implement an algebraic effects
  extension for ableC too.

- Stahl eliminators: In theory, I should be able to define a function that
  recurses over the definition of a datatype to be act as an
  eliminator/induction principle for it. The original levitation paper defines
  one, but their formulation doesn't work for the cleaned-up representation for
  datatypes I'm using (from A Practical Guide to Levitation). I've been toying
  with a different representation that I hope would make defining the generic
  eliminator easier, and improve the performance of a naive compiled
  implementation, so hopefully that works?

# Long-Term Plans (Thesis?)

## Algebraic Effects in Stahl

I think either linear types (or one of its extensions, such as quantitative
type theory) or /maybe/ coinduction might be able to fix the soundness issues?
I don't know how to do the proofs of soundness for MLTT (or dependent type
theories in general), so I'd need to learn to do those first.

## Cubical Levitation

Even if I get the Stahl eliminators item above working, Stahl still won't have
everything present in most HoTT/Cubical type theories. The biggest item is
higher inductive types (HITs). I don't think these should actually be too
incredibly hard to work in, but I don't know what soundness problems exist with
HITs, and I should like, actually learn the mathematical model behind cubical
type theory.

## Formally Verifying StahlOS

The parts of the implementation that (in my opinion at least) it makes sense to
formally verify are:

- the [builtins], which I'd probably need to define axiomatically in the
  high-level semantics.
- the "[pseudobuiltins]", which are basically just hand-compiled code that
  should be identical (or nearly so) to what the normal compiler would output.
- the first file of the [init process][init], which defines functions, IF,
  loops, string literals, and a lot of other stuff that would normally be built
  into the language itself.
- a simple [REPL][repl] that runs over the serial port.

This notably excludes the serial driver and the bootloader, but I think I'd
like to try and verify everything from when the bootloader hands off to the
kernel on.

I think this would probably have me learning separation logic, and possibly one
of the theorem provers with better support for calling an SMT solver (e.g.
Isabelle, though I remember a paper about extending Coq with one).

[koka]: https://github.com/koka-lang/koka
[builtins]: https://git.sr.ht/~remexre/stahl/tree/7bf2eb256167be5b7093a32d8819707d1bca1286/src/kernel-aarch64/forth/builtins.s
[pseudobuiltins]: https://git.sr.ht/~remexre/stahl/tree/7bf2eb256167be5b7093a32d8819707d1bca1286/src/kernel-aarch64/forth/pseudobuiltins.s
[init]: https://git.sr.ht/~remexre/stahl/tree/7bf2eb256167be5b7093a32d8819707d1bca1286/src/kernel-aarch64/init/init.fth
[repl]: https://git.sr.ht/~remexre/stahl/tree/7bf2eb256167be5b7093a32d8819707d1bca1286/src/kernel-aarch64/init/repl.fth
